---
layout: page
title: Lab 1
---

# Lab 4: Labs 1 and 2 Using Jupyter Notebooks

## Description

In this lab, you will be reworking labs 1 and 2 using Jupyter Notebooks instead of Vitis. Jupyter Notebooks is an interactive computing environment that enables users to edit and run code through the use of notebooks. The code within these notebooks can be run in chunks for easy debugging, with the outputs readily available to you. Jupyter notebooks can be used for many things other than coding such as creating plots, interactive widgets, etc. Connection to your AMD FPGA through Jupyter Notebooks provides a more abstracted interface to allow users with less hardware background to program on an FPGA. In this lab you will learn to use this powerful environment to interface with your AMD FPGA from hardware intialization to running your matrix multiply application on the implemented microprocessor. 

## Lab Objectives

1. Download, flash and boot your AMD FPGA using AMD Pynq
2. Access Jupyter Notebooks
3. Initialize and synthesize your hardware design
4. Run Lab 1's Hello World application
5. Modify and Run Lab 2's matrix multiply application

## Before You Start

{: .info-title}
> Before you open Vivado, you will need to install the AUP-ZU3 board files. These files contain the necessary information for Vivado to recognize the AUP-ZU3 board and its components, such as the FPGA, ARM processor, and peripherals. Without these files, you will not be able to create a hardware design for the AUP-ZU3 board in Vivado.
> 
> 1. Download the AUP-ZU3 board files from the following link: [AUP-ZU3 Board Files](https://www.github.com/RealDigitalOrg/aup-zu3-bsp)
> 2. Extract the downloaded files to a location on your computer where you can easily access them.
> 3. Copy the extracted `board_files` folder to the following directory: `{VITIS_INSTALL_ROOT}\Vivado\2025.2\data\boards\`. For example, if you installed Vivado in `C:\Xilinx\Vivado\2025.2`, you would copy the `board_files` folder to `C:\Xilinx\Vivado\2025.2\data\boards\`.

## Directions

### Flashing FPGA Board with AMD Pynq
1. Navigate to the URL: [https://www.pynq.io/boards.html](https://www.pynq.io/boards.html)
2. Retrieve your micro sd card and ensure it is at least 16 GB.
3. Download the corresponding image from the website. The image should be for the AUP-ZU3 board. For the specific version there should be a sticker near the processors cooler noting whether it is the 8 GB model or 4 GB model.
4. Once downloaded unzip the folder.
5. Insert your micro sd card into your sd card reader connected to the computer. Ensure that the sd card is empty.
6. Navigate to your desired sd card flashing program of choice, for a free option you can use [Balena Etcher](https://etcher.balena.io/). Choose the file within the unzipped folder as your image and flash it to your sd card.
7. Once flashing is finished connect your FPGA to power using one of the provided USB-C cables. With the other connect it to the DRP I USB 3.0 port and then to your computer. Ensure that the power switch is switched to OFF and the boot switch is on SD mode.
8. Insert the sd card containing the Pynq image into the FPGA and power on the board with the power switch.
9. At this point the board will go through a process to boot from the image on the sd card. The FPGA will go through a cycle of LEDs blinking.
    1. The PS LED1 should be blinking in a heart beat pattern.
    2. After ~30 seconds the DONE LED located near the USB 3.0 ports should be lit up solid green. Additionally the white LEDs located near the dip switches at the bottom of the board should light up.
10. Once these steps are finished the board is ready to be interfaced with!

### Vitis SDK

1. **Create a workspace for your Vitis SDK project.**
    - On your computer, create a new folder to serve as your workspace for Vitis SDK projects. For example, you could create a folder called "labs" in your project directory.
2. **Open Vitis SDK and create a new platform component.**
    1. On the welcome page in Vitis, select `New Platform Component` under **Embedded Development**.
    2. **Plaform Name:** E.g. "lab1_bsp". _NB: "_bsp" stands for "Board Support Package", this is a common naming convention for platform projects in Vitis SDK._
    3. **Platform Location:** Select the workspace folder you created earlier. E.g. `[project directory]/labs`.
    4. Click "Next" to select a hardware design (XSA).
    5. **Select Hardware:**
        1. Click "Browse" and navigate to your project directory.
        2. Select the `zynq_soc_wrapper.xsa` file". This file is generated by Vivado when you export your hardware design, and it contains all the necessary information about the hardware design for Vitis SDK to create a platform. Yours may be named differently depending on the name of your block design, but it should be in the same directory as your Vivado project and have a `.xsa` extension.
        3. Click "Next" to select an operating system.
    6. **Select OS Platform:**
        1. **Operating System:** Select "standalone". This means we will be running a simple application without an operating system, directly on the hardware.
        2. **Processor:** Select "psu\_cortexa53\_0". This is the ARM Cortex-A53 processor in the Zynq PS that we will be using to run our application.
        3. **Architecture:** 64-bit.
        3. Click "Next" to view a summary of the platform.
        4. Click "Finish" to create the platform. Your platform should now be visible under "Vitis Components" in the left panel.
        5. Wait for Vitis SDK to finish creating the platform. This may take a few minutes as it processes the hardware design and generates the device tree, peripheral drivers, and board configurations.
3. **Create a new application project.**
    1. In the application menu, select `File > New Component > Application`.
    2. **Component Name:** E.g. "lab1".
    3. **Component Location:** Select the workspace folder you created earlier.
    4. Click "Next" to select a target hardware.
    5. **Select Platform:**
        1. **Platform:** Select the platform you created earlier (e.g. "lab1\_bsp (aup-zu3-8gb)").
        2. Click "Next" to select an application domain.
    6. **Select Domain:**
        1. **Name:** Select "standalone\_psu\_cortexa53\_0". This domain corresponds to the standalone operating system running on the ARM Cortex-A53 processor in the Zynq PS. In our case, "standalone" means we will be running a simple application without an operating system, directly on the hardware, "bare metal".
        2. Click "Next" to view the application summary and finish.
        3. You should now see your application under "Vitis Components" in the left panel.
        4. Wait for Vitis SDK to finish creating the application. This may take a few minutes as it sets up the project structure and generates necessary files.
4. **Writing the Application:**
    1. Under "Vitis Components", find your application and navigate to `Sources > src`.
    2. Right-click on the `src` folder and select `New File`.
    3. Enter a file name, e.g. "lab1.cpp", and click "OK". _NB: You can use either C or C++ for your application, the file extension you use will determine the compiler used on your project (.c for C, .cpp for C++)._
    4. Use the following code snippet to get started with your application:
        ```c
        #include <iostream>
        
        int main(void) {
          // Print "Hello Zynq!" to the console.
        
          return 0;
        }
        ```
5. **Building and Running the Application:**
    1. In the top menu, select `Vitis > Serial Monitor`, use baudrate `115200`. The serial monitor window will open in the bottom panel.
    2. Under "Vitis Components", select your application, then in the "Flow" panel, click "Build".
    3. Once the build is complete, click "Run" to program the FPGA and run your application.
    4. If everything is set up correctly, you should see "Hello Zynq!" printed in the serial monitor.

{: .new-title }
> Congratulations!
>
> You've successfully built and run your first application on the Zynq SoC! In future labs, we will build more complex hardware designs and applications, but this is the foundation for everything we will do in this course.

## Next Steps

In the next lab, we will implement an example compute intensive application on the ARM processor and CPU optimization techniques, and benchmarking the performance of our application. 

## Troubleshooting

If you encounter any issues during this lab, here are some common troubleshooting steps:
1. If your platform is not available in Vitis after you created it, you may have to delete your workspace and start over. My Vitis has been glitching on new workspaces.
2. If you are having trouble with the serial monitor, make sure you have the correct COM port selected and that your baudrate is set to 115200.
